Even before the ink was dry on the designs of the M3 Medium, in August of
1940, ordinance told the designers to get started on the replacement vehicle
but this happened in February of '41 simply because they were too busy putting the finishing touches onto the M3
The resulting product was manufactured in September of '41; it was the Medium Tank T6
The remake the designers were given was pretty simple.
Put the 75 millimeter into a rotating turret, and make the tank smaller than the M3.
The T6 showed up at Aberdeen for testing; it was a strange combination
of the archaic and the modern. Certainly the stabilized gun and the syncromeshed transmission
showed promise. On the other hand, you still had something that had fixed, forward firing machine guns and it had all of
four hatches for the five crewman; two of those hatches were in the hull sides. The first of the production
M4A1's was built in the Lima Locomotive Works in February of 1942.
This was sent to Aberdeen Proving Grounds to work out some of the bugs. They were built to a British
contract. The second tank was sent to the United Kingdom for testing, it was named Michael,
possibly after Michael Duarte, the head of the British tank mission in the U.S.
That tank can still be seen today at The Tank Museum in Bovington, still in  its shiny
gloss green with the fixed forward firing machine guns. As such it is the oldest surviving Sherman Tank.
We're going to move forward to August of '43, and the reason is because that's when the Montreal Locomotive Works
ceased production of the Ram and started production of the Grizzly.
Now, the Grizzly is basically an M4A1 built with a couple of local tweaks in Canada.
Most of the 188 Grizzlies that were manufactured did not see combat.
As a result, the generally survived the war. Thus, most of the M4A1's you see in private hands
or in museums today are actually Grizzlies which have been backdated to look like
an American M4. This vehicle behind me here at the Military Vehicle Technology
Foundation at Portola Valley, California is one of these Grizzlies and will be the subject of our tour
which will happen in the usual manner: outside first, engine
and then in Part 2 we go inside. Pleasantries out of the way, let's get going.
We're going to start off with the first elephant: This particular M4 has been parked in between its two close contemporaries
The T-34-76 on one side, the Panzer 4 on the other
Immediately you'll see that this tank is not the smallest of the three. Most of this extra height
is in the hull; the turrets are pretty much equivalent.You may at first think
that this is actually a good thing because you've got more room, more comfortable positions for the crew,
you've got more stowage... you also have a bigger target. The reason this was done
is located to the left. The engine in the tank is mounted the same way it is on this stand
except a slight forward angle to allow the power shaft to go under the turret basket.
It's a tall engine. You need a tall engine bay. But the other advantage to the tall engine bay
is that you can fit a whole variety of engines into this one tank, which is applicable
considering the American manufacturing capability of the time. Moving to the hull,
the cast hull marks this as an M4A1; welded hull variants were simply M4
There was a composite, or hybrid, version that had a cast front and a welded back.
The U.S. Army categorized those as M4. The armor is
about 2 inches thick, starts at 37 degrees, goes up to 55 at the top
giving you an effective thickness of about 2.5 to 3.5 inches.
On a welded hull Sherman that 2 inch plate is at an even 57
This, if you count the slope, is at the better part of 3.5 inches and it compares
favorably to, say, the T-34 and better than most of the German tanks
There are, however, two small catches. Those are the bulges for the driver and the bow gunner.
These are weak points; surprise, surprise. So what they ended up doing
was welding, you'll often times see a piece of sheet metal welded in front of these
bulges to give it a little extra protection. The other catch is
this is what you'd call a small hatch Sherman. The early versions, because they had that steep
slope, didn't have much room on the roof of the hull to allow the hatch.
So, the hatches on the early versions were very small. The earliest M4 actually
came with a direct vision port in the bulge itself, but that was soon deleted.
Moving on to the components we're going to start with the most important part of the tank.
No, it's not the gun; at least not in this case. If you think about it it's a small quirk of geography
Unlike most of the other combatants, the U.S. was separated from the rest of the world,
and the fighting, by a couple of small bodies of water called the Atlantic and the Pacific.
This meant that you had to get whatever it was you built in Ohio and
in Detroit and Wisconsin and everywhere else that they were making tanks from the U.S.
to, say, Europe on a ship. To get it onto a ship you had to lift it up.
We didn't have, back then, the roll on roll off ships that we're familiar with today. You had
to get a crane, hook onto the lifting eyes, lift it up, put it over and down into the hold.
Your next catch is that most of the cranes of the time had a weight limit
and a lot of that weight limit was frequently 40 tons which
basically put an upper end limit. You could build a heavy tank in the U.S.
but if most of your ship cranes or land cranes couldn't lift it and out of the ship
it's not going to do you a lot of good. That was why the American heavy tank
never found great favor. There were other problems as well. The M6 heavy for example
was mechanically unreliable, god awful, huge and ugly and whatever.
But by and large the Americans pinned their flag to the medium tank, and of course the lights.
As we move on, we have the brush guards covering the service lights and marker lights,
another brush guard for the siren and we have a G stamp
for General Steel. General Steel was basically a subcontractor.
If memory serves, there's about 4,237 parts in an M4A4
and about 80 of them were subcontractors
This meant that General Steel, who was of course in the U.S., were shipping
These casting to Montreal for final production.
As we move on, we go to the three piece transmission housing.
Of course later on you ended up with the single piece and the finally the sharp nose
but all the Grizzlies as near as we can tell, were made with the three piece. This is one of the later versions
of the three piece because you have this little lip protecting the bolts.
The idea of the bolts? Simple enough: If you have to change out the transmission or something you simply
unbolt this, hook up a crane, pull off the housing, there's your transmission right in front of you.
It took about 2 hours to change a transmission which, by the standards of the time,
especially if you compare it to the Panther we did before, is pretty quick.
The bolts were originally open and exposed and susceptible to enemy fire which meant
that when you had to change the transmission, you had to spend half the time just shearing off the bolt
so this lip was added for protection.
By the end of Sherman's production run though, the housing
completely encased the bolt; the bolt was in a recess and thus much more protected.
While I'm here I'm going to go off on a bit of a tangent
I was having a chat on the phone with Tom Yance who made me feel like I know absolutely nothing
He postulated to me that Sherman's reputation for reliability was overstated
and that in fact it was not anymore reliable than any other tank of the time
which, of course raises an eyebrow
because we all know that Sherman was praised for its reliability.
To some extents, it was. I mean, if you compare it to the early Cromwells for example, yeah it definitely was.
But compared to other in-service I have never actually done a per-mile breakdown rate assessment
The way he put it was, and i think he might have been on to something,
The reliability of Sherman came from the operational readiness rate.
When a commander said "Tomorrow morning we're going to attack with my 100 tanks",
How many of them would actually cross the starting line? And it would be 99 or 100 tanks
And the reason they could do that was because of the maintainability of the tank.
There are a couple of features here. First we've already mentioned how quick it is to exchange parts
The second thing is that the Americans brought spare parts and they brought a lot of them
Unlike, say, the Germans, where units would be fighting each other at the train depot to get a part,
Americans had spare parts coming out the wazoo. They basically had entire tanks in individual component form
sitting in the warehouses
So, we have to repair a tank. Let's say the transmission needs replacing, pull off the housing,
go get the spare part, bring the spare part back, plug it in and it will fit perfectly
because the American parts were built to high design tolerances.
If you saw a vice or other fitting materials on the workbench it was a sign of incompetence
because if you did your job right the first time, the part fit.
So, you now have this part that fits, it goes right in,
you close up the transmission housing, you're done in 2 hours,
you can go on to the next tank.
So,  you could change three Sherman transmissions in the same time it'd take you to do one Panther.
Put that way, I think you very well may have a point. Now, again,
I have not done the per-mile reliability assessment ratings or checks
If anybody out there on the web has done so or can link to them, please put it in the comments,
I'd be curious to see the results
Other features on the front, that little tangent over, the gun crutch a.k.a. travel lock,
gun crutch is, of course, what the English would call it,
and the bow .30 cal machine gun
That's the front. That didn't take too long. Let's go around the side.
As you come around to the side of the tank, you see that the running gear is taken, pretty much, straight off the M3
Medium. There are a couple of minor differences, the tracks are not one of them.
They're the same 16 and 9/16 inch wide. They came in a smorgasbord of variations
I'm not going to list them all right now, but I am going to mention the Canadian dry pin.
CDP was a shorter pitched track; there were more links per side. It meant that
you had to have more teeth on the sprocket wheel.
So, if you're looking at a Sherman and you see that there seems to be a rather inordinate amount of teeth
on the sprocket, chances are that you are dealing with a commonwealth vehicle.
Obviously the Canadians like CDP the most but I do believe that the British used them as well
The problem with the narrow track also carries on from the M3 Medium.
The thinking behind it is that if you have small narrow track, there's less weight of metal you have to haul around,
your tank will go faster.
Which is fine on hard surface, not so fantastic if you're
going around in the mud in Russia
So, some work-arounds were developed
The first work-around was the simple duck bill. This is an extended end connector; there's basically a
little plate that comes out a couple inches; it gives you a bit more surface area in contact with the ground.
If this wasn't enough you could then move to the Easy 9 suspension.
What this was, was there was a spacer that you would put in between the bogie and the hull side.
It would shove the bogie out about 6 inches and there's another advantage to modularity of the bogie system.
You them had enough room to mount additional extended end connectors on the inside of the track,
and this really did increase the flotation capability of the vehicle.
One of these E9s is still visible at the National World War 2 Museum in New Orleans
if you happen to be down that way and you wanted to look it up.
The bogies were originally the light duty version, or at least, what we would now know as light duty.
The return roller was up top and center.
In the middle of 1942 they changed. They moved the roller to the rear; that's your visual identifier.
They replaced it with a metal skid and that design kind of tweaked a bit over time.
Most importantly they increased the diameter of the springs under here
from 7 inches to 8 inches making them a lot more durable.
The whole system would span a 7.5 foot trench and it would climb a 24 inch wall.
And you look at the M10 we did before and that would only scale an 18 inch wall.
Why the difference, because the running gear is the same? As near as I can tell, it's a matter of weight.
The M4 had a little bit more weight pushing down on the track and gave you a little bit more grip.
The last thing I'll mention while we're on the subject of running gear is the gap in between the bogies.
On most M4s the spacing between the wheels is pretty much the same as you have here.
The exception is the M4A4.
This had a longer engine; the entire hull needed to be extended which meant that the bogies were spread out a bit further.
So, an M4A4 would have a gap between the bogies about the size of an additional road wheel.
The primary user of the M4A4 was the British.
There was also the M4A6 but you almost never see any of those.
As you move up a little bit, just forward there is a mount for either a radio antenna
or if there's no radio because its not a command tank a ventilator.
Then we move to the sponson where much of the ammunition was stowed.
This is actually in common with a lot of other tanks despite the reputation the M4 had for burning.
It was indeed the ammunition that was the cause, not the petrol.
And there were a couple of solutions proposed. Eventually of course, wet stowage
but the interim solution was applique armor: You simply put more armor between
the guys shooting at you and the ammo.
Whether or not it did sufficient amounts of use is another matter
but they put the applique anyway and then they put a nice, big, white,
helpful aiming mark so that the gunners could get their detonations anyway.
As you move further up, you'll see a lot of Shermans will have similar applique  armor
on the front of the turret
The reason this was done was that in order to make room for the gun control equipment on the inside of the tank
They had to shave out some of the metal of the wall on the inside of the turret.
This meant that you had thin armor now between the outside world and the gunner and the TC.
The long-term solution was a new casting of the turret.
You will see some turrets that actually have a bulge cast into it.
The short term solution was just, from the factory, additional plates of applique armor that would be welded to the side.
Now we come to the back of the tank where ordinarily I'd talk about track tension.
I'm not going to do it this time. Half of you are going "Hooray!".
The reason for this is that it's exactly the same as you saw on the M3 Medium and the M10 Tank Destroyer.
It's the big wrench, the big bolt, that's as far as I'll go with that.
Instead I will mention the engine: the Wright Whirlwind R975
When we first encountered this engine in the M3 Medium it was rated by the manual at 400 horsepower
running a higher octane level of fuel
In this installation the manual rates it at only 350 horsepower running on 80 octane.
The engine had a couple of quirks: The first one was its tendency to over rev.
I was talking with a driver of the time and he said that the problem was
In times when you really really needed the power like when someone was shooting at you
and you wanted to go somewhere really quickly,
You didn't think too much about the engine. You just put your foot down,
the engine would rev up and then you had a good chance of blowing the engine.
The other problem, being a radial engine is that you have to hand crank the thing
because all of the fluids, the oils will all settle at the bottom of the cylinders  and you end up with a hydro-static lock.
As a result if you have a cold engine, you've got to turn it over, hence turning over the engine.
To do that you used the hand crank.
Which is simple enough.
Insert it into this little hole back here, the M18 Gun Motor Carriage, the Hellcat, had the same thing.
Just feed it through, it hooks in
to a little notch in there and you can then start cranking
60 times
before the engine is considered to be suitably rotated and you can start it up.
To give you a better idea of what's going on back here let's move over to the demonstrator model
we have around the corner.
Now we have the demonstrator model. You can see the aiming mark that's on the inside of the tank.
And you can also see from the bar, just how deep inside it is.
Fit it into the notch and start cranking. You'll see the radiator fans turning on the far side.
I'm not going to do it all 60 times.
So, that done I'll just put this right back in.
Of course, you wouldn't have to do this if the engine was warm but still I have no doubt that a crew was
very happy to get engines a little bit more modern later on in the war that you didn't have to do this every time.
Again, the M18 Gun Motor Carriage, you still had to it had the radial engine.
While I'm back here, the other two things we see here are the large air filters and the exhaust port
and the cooling air would be blasted through the big gap in between the hull roof
and the back wall, to be deflected downwards right into the dust
and dirt just what you didn't want to have signifying your position
to anybody within miles in North Africa's desert.
There were also sand shields; you'll see on the side of the hull the holes for the mounting of the sand shields; they did not last very long
Once they were broken off nobody bothered to repair them
So, getting up, this is not the hardest tanks to get up.
You've got good hand holds.
Of course, you can use the bogies.
So now that we're up here we can start talking about the different engine deck variants.
The M4s and M4A1s with the Continental radial, they had an engine deck similar to this
with an armored intake up the front and no grill further back.
The M4A2 was the twin diesel version and it used the same power pack we saw on the M10.
This had large grills opening up on the rear deck.
The M4A2 of course was mainly a Lend-Lease tank. The Soviets used it; some of the British got them
and of course the U.S. Marines used them as well simply because they were the only Shermans that they had available at the time
and the Marines said "Well, we'll take these now, please. Thank you very much".
The M4A3 was a version that had the Ford V8, the GAA; excellent engine, about 500 horsepower.
This became the de facto American tank after the war. It saw plenty of service in Korea
This also had large grills on the back, different filler part configuration of course because there's only the one engine.
The grills were a bit larger than those on the M4A2.
The M4A4 was the one with the wonderful Chrystler 30 cylinder contraption, the A57 multi-bank.
This was the longer engine with the longer engine deck
and your visual identifier is outside.
The British actually really liked the M4A4 and we''ll be coming to that one in a future story.
The M4A6, there was another version based off
of the M4A4 chassis so it was also elongated it had a caterpillar multi-fuel radial engine.
However, only 75 of those were built
and they only ever saw service in the U.S. So if you see a
tank with spaced road wheels, and it's actually in operation in Europe,
It's British probably but it's certainly an M4A4.
There was the M4A5 designation which you will note I have skipped.
The M4A5 is what the Americans called the Ram.
Quite why they did that i don't know because the Ram was really an M3 based vehicle.
If you look at the builders plate of this Grizzly, it actually says Montreal Locomotive Works
M4A1. So, perhaps that's why they didn't come up with a separate designation for the Grizzlies themselves.
Okay, so to get the engine deck up, which is a two man job, I have
summoned my beautiful assistant here, Meathead
This is your moment of fame to the Inside the Hatch audience. If you don't know him, he's popular enough on the NA side of things
-If you could give me a hand here please                                                    -Absolutely
-Thank you very much
-That was heavy
-Go away
So now we have the engine bay open. You can see the Continental as it is installed inside the tank.
It's mounted on the brackets. There are four large bolts that are holding it in place.
So if you wanted to pull the engine out, you'd undo the deck, lift that out of the way, lift up the engine
by of course, disconnecting the power shaft, the fuel lines and what have you.
This particular engine will get the tank up to a burst speed of 24 miles an hour and a sustained speed
of about 21. Of course this was the weakest of the engine options.
Later versions of the tank would go a  bit faster: up to 30.
You can also see in here the red pipes for the fire extinguisher system. This was a 2 shot system, it could be fired
from either inside the tank or by use of a handle on the engine deck just left rear of the turret.
Further forward under its own fuel tank port is the auxiliary motor.
This of course would be used for running the system without draining
the main fuel tanks and of course putting wear and tear on the main engine.
Speaking of fuel, the fuel in this system would be 168 gallons.
That would be enough to get you about 120 miles.
Some help he was. I told him to go away and he took it literally.
Well that brings us to the end of Part 1 and of course Part 2 will be the interior positions which we will get to at a later date.
I'll see you then.
later vehicles showed up with a new suspension
Hello spider... Are you having fun?
I'm going to skip forward a little very quickly to...
Some time in 1943. Wait, what?
[Off Camera]-I imagine that music will be played over this
Daaaaaaaaaaaaaah! Daaaaaaaaaaaaaah! Daaaaaaaaaaaaaah!
You're going to be relocated from the Sherman... To the T-34